Let us firstly say thank you to Heritage Lottery Wales for supporting this short project of
memories of people who lived and were from Butetown, Tiger Bay, the docks.
And I hope you find the time to listen to it fully.
This next one is from Dowd Suliman, part two.
Butetown is a community which could teach our governors how life should be.
You know, if they only took the way people lived in Butetown and put things together
and had things the same, I'm sure the world would be a much better place.
Well, we had a tragedy happen, which shouldn't have happened, where the last man to be hanged in Wales
was a Somali guy who'd come here and he'd married a local girl and had a family.
And he was accused of murdering Mrs. Roberts.
She was an old Jewish lady that had a dashery shop and whatnot in Bute Street.
And he had nothing to do with it. He only went to her aid.
But, you know, the police came and arrested him, and as far as they were concerned, he didn't.
And that was it. But years later, his children fought and fought and fought, and they managed to succeed.
And we had his grave opened up and his body was taken out of the prison and Shigside buried him at our section in Ely Cemetery.
And by then, they'd exhausted that family because his wife and his children, they suffered dearly for what they went through.
And it was just an open and shut case as far as the police were concerned then.
I know they were different times. They didn't have the things that we have today to do their inquiries.
But, you know, it was, if you were someone of colour, they rode it through whatever they wanted and that was it.
Yeah, that was the problem, wasn't it? You know, all of the decision makers and the courts were outside of the bay.
You know, those people under the bridge effectively, under the railway bridge and across the canal, they decided.
I mean, I always say to people that whether they like it or not, without the bay, without the docks, without Bute Town, Cardiff would not be the capital of Wales.
Exactly, exactly. The area of Bute Town brought character to Cardiff.
And money.
And money, yes, exactly.
Without the docks and the seamen and the shipping company.
Yeah, exactly. And Bute Town's got to be recognised and should be proud of that factor, what the people of Bute Town did for Cardiff.
I mean, I think that over the years, no group has demonstrated more what becoming a citizen means of a country.
I mean, all of the merchants, you know, like my granddad and all the Yemeni and Somali people, they didn't come here asking for anything.
No, they were hard workers.
Yeah, and then they had their families and they made their families and their kids respectful and made them citizens of Wales.
Yeah, that's right. Yeah, exactly.
And you know, in the old days on the ships, it wasn't like the ships today.
They'd have to go and buy their own bales of hay and whatnot to take on to sleep on, on the ship.
They had it really hard, you know, and their rations for food were, you know, the shipping companies didn't want to spend too much on them.
Life was very difficult on the ships in their days.
They didn't. They were always paid a little bit less.
Yeah. And the shipping companies loved them.
The Somalis and the Yemenis, they loved them because they would go on the ship.
And they'd stay on until they were thrown off.
So there was none of this change in crews and whatnot.
That's why they got on so well.
You know, the shipping companies, that's all they'd use.
One company would use malaise, all malaise, you know, and they'd have their own leader amongst them.
And any problems like the captain went to see their leader and he sorted any problems out that they had.
And more or less the same with the Somalis and the Yemenis.
They'd have somebody there who would act as their leader, like a spokesman, and they'd take up any issues with the company or the company had come to them and say what they wasn't happy with and whatnot.
And that's how life was.
They left their countries to come to look for a better way of life.
That's all they came for. They didn't come to steal anybody's job.
They were looking for a better life.
And the truth is they could have settled anywhere.
Anywhere.
And they chose the bay and barry for a reason.
Yeah, barry. Thompson Street and barry like this.
And like the bay, the minute the docks was running down, they knocked down everything that mattered.
Yeah, all the history gone. Yeah, yeah.
Terrible.
And those people, they were lovely people.
I can remember when we used to go to barry from Tadi, all they fussed over us and, you know, we were given sweets and things and whatnot, which we wouldn't normally have.
And they treated us like we'd come from miles and miles away.
And that's how it was.
And the same in places when the shipping started to slack off, people started moving inland, you know, to Birmingham and Manchester and whatnot.
And the same up there. You know, when you went visiting, you were treated like something special.
So you always looked forward to go visiting in these other places.
Yeah, the one thing that's kept though, and I mean, unlike another place that was linked to Cardiff and barry, South Shields.
South Shields, exactly. Which is where it shakes hate. Exactly the same thing.
Yeah. That's right. Yeah. They have exactly the same thing there. They have it tough up there.
Yeah. Tougher than the people in Cardiff.
I think because they were more isolated. Cardiff was, the bay was a tighter community.
That's right.
Always taught me they were more vulnerable. You could get to them.
You couldn't get to the bay. You know, the men on the bay could close it down.
The way it was situated. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. Exactly.
But some of those people, you know, the stories we've heard about them in South Shields, they went through hell.
You know, all because of their color, because they came from somewhere other than England.
You know, but they stood their ground and whatnot.
And they managed to succeed and carry on with their lives and whatnot there.
And some of their women that they married, they would stand up. They were as good as a man.
They'd stand up and defend.
When people went to see, I know from sort of my gran, I mean, it was clear listening to her, women ran the family.
Oh, God, yeah.
Everything. Women ran the family. And you were a fool to cross them.
Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's true. Yeah.
You had nine or ten kids. There's got to be something special about you.
They were good, honest people who just wanted a bit of justice.
You know, they wouldn't look into cause problems or anything. They just wanted fairness for everybody.
But they were strong-willed people, strong-willed women.
And, you know, they need to be remembered for what they were because they went through some tough time.
And people don't get, all of us have got a white grandmother or a white...
Exactly, yeah.
And they brought us up. They brought us up.
Well, you know, when my mother married my dad, she was from the Runnery Valley.
And, you know, she had to come to Cardiff to work when she was 14.
And she worked in the infirmary and lived in there, the infirmary as well, before she met my dad.
And the people up there in Trinidad, they said, oh, the girl's gone crazy. She's married a heathen.
And this and that.
Well, you know, during the war, we were lucky enough because of the ships coming in with everything.
We always had enough to get by.
And my dad, he used to send the parcel up to the Trinidad every month with things like butter, cheese, stuff you couldn't buy if you had the money, you know, and tobacco.
And then he was the best man in the world, you know.
Yeah.
Because no matter what they said, his wife, that was her family.
And family is all greeting.
But those women, they were special women. They were strong.
And they stood by their husbands and their family. And they, you know, they would be prepared to fight for them as well.
Which some of them had to do at times.
And they were special women.
And these women, they come from nowhere.
And they took up the language of their husbands.
And most of them spoke a second language.
You know, wherever their husbands come from, they learned the language of their husbands.
And they were very, very strong women, you know, to have done that.
Yeah. I mean, it's a strange thing, isn't it?
What you know about where your dad came from and grandparents.
And what I know about where my granddad came from, that comes from my nan.
And you know, it was, she made sure I knew who he was and where he was from.
Exactly. Yeah. That's good. Yeah.
You know, that's, you need to remember the history and the people of those times, what they went through.
Because life must have been pretty tough for them, you know.
Although a lot of them were happy in the end, they succeeded.
They had nice families. They had nice homes.
And they had nothing to worry about.
They didn't come, like you say, looking for trouble or anything.
They came looking to better their lives.
And even though they had families here, a lot of them still supported their families that they left behind.
And they would send them money and whatnot to help them make a little bit of a better life for themselves where they lived.
So it was good. I mean, my dad, when I was nine years old, my dad sent me out to the Yemen.
And in those days, we had to go by sea. There was no planes and nothing.
And we went out on one of the ships, the Uganda, and we were dropped off in Aden.
And from Aden, we made our way up into the Yemen.
Aden was a British protector at that time.
And I went out then. I stayed there for two years or more.
And what an experience that was.
I went, I mean, in the Yemen, away from Aden, inside the Yemen, it's a country which hasn't changed much since the beginning of time.
It's like going back 2,000 years in history. And it's still the same.
But it was a great experience for me because people treated me like I was a king there.
And my dad used to send me two pounds every month for pocket money.
And I couldn't spend that two pounds. I still had money left over at the end of the month.
And things were cheap. Things were honest and whatnot.
But even it's something the same, even in the Yemen today, the Yemen has changed.
They've had these rich Saudis have taken a seat.
They're trying to exploit the Yemen and the Emirates.
They're all trying to exploit the Yemen. But the Yemen will never change.
They've had troubles before. And they've got over them. And they'll survive this as well.
It must have been interesting for you seeing where your dad came from.
And maybe understanding what it must have been like when he was actually arriving in other places.
Suddenly there's all this busyness and the docks and...
Oh, God, yeah. It made you think.
When I first got there, when we got into the Yemen, into the village where I stay, nobody spoke English.
So I sat there and thought, what have I done?
But people were so good and nice and comforting.
I thought I'd better learn the language quick. I could speak a little bit then, but not a great deal.
And within six months I was away speaking.
And everybody loved one another. Then these things were different there.
It's hard to see these changes.
It's interesting though, isn't it? Because language... You think you're speaking the language until you arrive.
It's like somebody from Oxford arriving in the bay.
There's phrases and things that people say that make no sense to an outsider.
No, that's right. And that's our home.
Well, like I say, I spent 35 years traveling.
And one of the best feelings was when you came back on the train from London and you smelt the fish by the railway station.
And that smell identified with home.
And it was great. You were back here.
I was saying about language. A friend of mine says, what does that mean in Wales?
He said, what do you mean? He said, now in a minute.
Yeah, now in a minute.
And those little things won't be there.
Yeah, that's right. Who's caught in this jacket?
They don't get it. We think it's funny too.
Okay, I've taken a lot of your time up, man.
You're welcome.
Let me ask you something, right.
You're back to this imaginary person that's having a cup of coffee and they're looking at all of those new shops and restaurants.
And one thing they don't know is if they'd have walked along those, you know, Bute Street and the other streets when they were, when we were kids, they'd have smelt more food from around the world.
Oh, God, yeah. They would have had the aromas of the different spices.
And the place was alive.
We used to eat from all the way around the world. We used to eat English food.
We used to eat Somali food. Proper Chinese, proper cooked food.
But okay, so we're back to this person. What would you say to them?
As they're looking across, you know, they're from the Norwegian church, all those shops. What would you say to them?
I'd say if only you knew what went on in this area many, many years ago before it was redeveloped.
This place was a bustling with workers, stockers and people working in the factories and whatnot, going about their everyday business.
It was alive and it provided a living for the majority of people in places such as Butone and Cranestone.
And it was a different place, like what it is today.
But the memories of the years gone by, they were good too. It's a bit more luxurious there.
I can remember the Norwegian church when it was in an original spot.
My friend used to clean it for six months, six months a week. He used to go in and clean it up.
And I mean now they've moved it to where it is and it's very nice and beautiful and a place to be proud of.
But it had a lot of history in days gone by, passed through that church, the Norwegian church.
Heaven knows how much disappeared when they knocked down the houses.
That's right. Oh God, it was a shame. They were beautiful houses.
I mean you had billionaires living in the area before those people and all the well to do.